
This is the second in a series of posts discussing the importance of human centered design in IT centralization. As part of a 10x project, we've synthesized 18F's learnings from working with agency partners into a series of guides and best practices. The series explores how and why taking the time to prioritize users generates more success and overall happiness for an agency. 


Deciding whether or not to centralize

To centralize or not to centralize? The Department of Justice (DOJ) was eager to improve its internal IT strategy and wondered if centralization was the right road to take to get there. They saw opportunities to consolidate, streamline, and reorganize common IT functions across departments. But they had some concerns: 
Would it make sense to reorganize and streamline some IT services but not others?
Would this effort reduce costs and increase efficiency or would it be a budget drain?
Would it make employees happy or end up being a burden on them? 
Does this situation sound familiar? Many agencies have found themselves in a similar boat when evaluating IT centralization. 
After interviewing several folks who’ve experienced some sort of centralization effort, we’ve developed some best practices for navigating the possibility of centralizing in a user-centered way. 
5 things to remember when considering centralization
Set specific, realistic, measurable goals
Bring the right people to the table
Collaborate to identify the problem and set the vision
Avoid one-size-fits-all
Anticipate the hurdles
Incorporating human centered design should be part of your strategy. Because at the end of the day, if your users are not benefiting from the centralization, it’s probably not a good idea. 
1. Set specific, realistic, measurable goals   
The President’s Management Agenda encourages agencies to improve transparency, customer service, service sharing, and reduce redundancies in service of the agency’s mission. These are all really big goals. As you move to implement them, it will be important to prioritize one. This doesn’t mean not achieving the others, but choosing one to drive toward first. 
Your goals should depend on what type of function you are looking to centralize. Whether centralizing is appropriate or not often depends on 1) how often a service repeats across an agency and 2) how important flexibility is to delivering on the agency’s mission. 
Below is a spectrum showing examples of when centralization is cool at the top moving down to examples where allowing for more flexibility is important.
CENTRALIZATION IS COOL
- Telephones
- Laptops
- WiFi
- Productivity tools (email, word processing, powerpoint, etc.)
- Application security
- Application hosting
- SaaS
- Design systems and standards
- Software development
ALLOW FLEXIBILITY 

Spend some time defining how centralizing the IT function you have in mind would help your agency reach each goal. Try and map goals based on the effort they will take to achieve and the impact they will have on your users. Prioritize high positive impact and medium-to-low effort. 
Clarifying your goals will help with communication across your organization and identify ways other folks in the agency can play a role.  
2. Bring the right people to the table   
Nothing is worse than investing large amounts of money and time into something that nobody likes or uses. This scenario is often the result of not having the right people at the table when making the decisions about what to build or buy. Those missing voices will help challenge assumptions around what is useful. 
In the user-centered design world, we believe the people who use services everyday should always be at the table. At the beginning of your effort to understand whether to centralize an IT function or not, identify front-line partners who use the services. Front-line partners can help you understand how the services are used, the problems users have, and the opportunities users see. You will be most successful if you work together.  
Front-line managers, for example, often have the best insight into why current systems are set up the way they are and what features they need in the future. They are experts in their areas and should have decision power over what services are delivered. IT managers should have decision power over how they are delivered. 
3. Collaborate to identify the problem and set the vision
At 18F, we’ve worked with several agencies as they’ve gone through the process of engaging users in decision-making. Here are a few methods we’ve found to be effective along the way: 
Capturing hopes and fears
Hopes and Fears is a useful exercise at the beginning of any project. Bring all of your stakeholders into a room to share their hopes and magic-wand-wishes for a project as well as any fears, concerns, and questions. Write each hope or fear on a sticky note. A facilitator can cluster them as they moderate a discussion around the sticky note responses. This is a great way to level-set and start to build trust with a wide group of stakeholders. 
Defining the current state 
Start by mapping out how things work now. This will help ensure changes you introduce will improve current processes - not block them. Depending on how deep you want to go, this exercise can happen in one meeting or can be stretched out into several sessions. 
Start by defining the ways an IT function currently works. A few guiding questions for understanding the current state are: 
What systems does the IT function touch? 
Who uses it and how? 
Why is it set up this way?
What is working and what isn’t? 
What workarounds have people created? 
What impact does it have on the mission? 
Going through these questions will help identify which services may be good to consolidate and which should remain siloed. During this process make sure to note any barriers to consolidation - what roadblocks might you run into if you attempt consolidation in these areas? 
It may also be a good idea to run through the 5 Whys if you find any particularly gnarly problems. To do this, start with asking why the problem occurs. The answer to the first “why” should prompt the next “why” until you reach the root cause of the issue. 
Defining success metrics
How will you know if your efforts are successful or unsuccessful? Hopefully your organization already has Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that you can measure against. Make sure your KPIs include outcomes you want to achieve for users. This will help ensure any new solutions work well for them and not just the bottom line. 
A couple examples of strong KPIs might be: 
A contracting officer can use this system to write a contract 5% faster than on the current system.
A contracting officer will be able to use this system to write a contract in the same amount of time as the current system, but it will cost 5% less.
Start by using existing metrics to understand how well your current state is serving you. Ask yourself, and your stakeholders: 
Are there places where you’re already doing well that may not need more improvement? 
Which places would benefit most from investment? 
Use metrics to understand your current state first, then create meaningful metrics to measure the impact you hope to have. These metrics will help track the progress of your project, measure vendor performance, and understand if your efforts are having the impact you hoped for. 
Pro-tip: If you’re not already measuring a service, make sure you know how you can get to the data. Unmeasurable metrics aren’t very helpful to anyone. 
Outlining your future state 
Now that you understand the current state, you can make informed choices for the future. A useful exercise at this point is writing a vision statement. Your vision statement should focus on the impact you want to make for users and stakeholders. This will help keep your team focused as you choose and implement new solutions. 
After writing your statement, outline what needs to change to see movement in your success metrics. Keep in mind that updating or integrating IT services may not be the only ways to affect change. Look for less resource- and time-intensive ways to make a difference for your users in the short-term. 
It’s important to try not to get too attached to a detailed plan at the beginning of a project. Remember that you will learn as you go and may need to adjust your plans along the way. If you’re working in an agile way this is natural. As Graham Kenny writes, “strategic plans are less important than strategic planning”.
You can find other activities we use to define the problem and set a vision at the 18F Methods during the “Discover” phase.
4. Avoid one-size-fits-all
It can tempting to solve everyone’s problems in one big bang, but one size never fits all when it comes to centralization. Users have unique needs that one-size-fits-all solutions may meet awkwardly at best. Services that don’t fit well may, at best, get left on the shelf and, at worse, cost more money to customize or fix in the future.  


Reduce risk by starting small 
In addition to meeting user needs, the numbers show that smaller projects are less risky than larger ones. According to the Standish Group Chaos Report, small projects succeed 62% of the time, compared to 6% of large projects. Large projects are naturally more complex. More moving parts and larger teams are harder to manage. This is a large risk to take when dealing with a centralization effort that will impact many people. 
If you’re trying to address many different problems, consider restructuring the work into smaller chunks to avoid risk and complexity. 18F’s acquisitions team calls this approach modular contracting. 
Give users a choice
A centralized service offering will be better received if users feel like they have a choice. Mandating that users use specific tools is more likely to lead to users developing work arounds and use of shadow IT. You can develop and maintain trust by making it voluntary and low-to-no cost to use your centralized offering. The competition with other tools  will also help you focus on delivering more value to the users than other options. 
Keep track of which tools people are using and identify which tools/services are most popular among users. 
5. Anticipate the hurdles
Don’t wait until the end of a project to make the following considerations: 
Start early on getting an Authority to Operate (ATO)
Leaving this process until the end will only add time to your project, delaying value to your users. Make sure you involve your policy and security team members early to understand compliance, which will make the end of the project go smoother. 
Consider your rollout plan
Identifying what IT functionality should exist is only the beginning. Start thinking about how you will communicate the changes you make to your team, how you will phase out or update existing systems, and how you will maintain trust with your users. 
At the end of the day, centralization may or may not be the right strategy for your agency. Approaching the decision in a user-centered way will help you gain trust with your team and reduce the risk of making a poor investment. 
Next in our series, we’ll talk about working with vendors and how to build or buy a centralized solution from them in a user-centered way. 
